---
layout: post
title:  "Dealing With Stained Teeth"
date:   2016-09-26 19:20:39 +0100
categories: jekyll update
---

Patients often ask us why their teeth have become stained.  There are a number of possible reasons why teeth this might happen:

1. Natural wear and tear reduces the thickness of the enamel surface, exposing the more yellow dentine and therefore changing the colour of the teeth (incidentally, this is why baby teeth appear whiter than adult teeth as they have a higher enamel:dentine ratio)

2. Decay may be the cause of staining as it is brown or black in colour.  This is usually accompanied by a physical hole, but not always.

3. Food stains.  These are usually down to tea or coffee but regular consumption of other foods can build up over time and stain the teeth

4. Smoking, especially without a filter, will cause brown build ups that can be very hard to remove

If decay is the cause then we need to use tooth coloured fillings to restore the natural colouration of the tooth.

If it is a more superficial staining, then a simple scale and polish is the first choice.  Sometimes that is not quite enough and for more stubborn and extensive staining you can ask for a treatment using the EMS AirFlow.

If the staining is deeper and more engrained, then professional Tooth Whitening is the treatment of choice.  We can supply you with trays and gel to wear through the night.  This will gradually and safely lighten your teeth.

As with most things, prevention is better than a cure, and we would advise you to take a close look at what caused the staining in the first place and see if there are any changes you can make yourself.
